<div id="main" class="col-md-9" role="main">

# Spatially-informed differential gene expression

Differential gene expression testing is a fundamental part in studies
using “bulk” RNAseq data, and continues to be critical in the analysis
of single-cell and spatial transcriptomics (ST). The `STdiff` function
from the ***`spatialGE`*** package provides methods for traditional,
non-spatial differential gene expression analysis such as Wilcoxon’s
rank test, T-test, and mixed models.

Spatial transcriptomics presents a new challenge for differential gene
expression analysis. In ST, gene expression is measured at locations
(spots or cells) that are separated by fixed or variable distances.
Within each assayed tissue, cells or spots that are close are more
likely to be transcriptomically similar compared to distant cells or
spots. This correlation between transcriptomic similarity and spatial
distance is known as spatial dependency. Neglecting the spatial
dependency in ST may result in inflation of type I error (Ospina et al.
(2024)) and an excess of differentially expressed genes (false
positives).

To visually illustrate the existence of spatial dependency in ST data, a
variogram can be used. A variogram is a plot that shows how a variable
(gene expression in this case), varies with respect to distance among
the locations (spots or cells).

<div class="section level2">

## Spatial dependency in ST data (melanoma stage III tumor biopsies)

The spatial dependency is described quantitatively by means of the
spatial covariance among spots/cells. The estimation of spatial
covariance is computationally expensive, especially if the ST data that
contains thousands of spots/cells. For convenience, in this tutorial the
smaller ST data set generated by Thrane et al. (2018) will be used. This
data set includes lymph node biopsies from four patients with stage III
melanoma, with two tissue slices per biopsy. This technology is a
predecessor of the Visium assay, and allowed RNA capture in up to 1,007
spots separated each other by 200μM. The spots are 100μM in diameter,
which corresponds to 5-40 cells according to the authors.

For this tutorial, we will use two of the eight samples in Thrane et al.
(2018). The data set is included in the [spatialGE_Data GitHub
repository](https://github.com/FridleyLab/spatialGE_Data) repository,
but users can also find the data in the [authors’
website](https://www.spatialresearch.org/resources-published-datasets/doi-10-1158-0008-5472-can-18-0747/).

<div class="section level3">

### Creating an STlist (Spatial Transcriptomics List)

The `spatialGE` package does not have built-in methods to generate
variogram plots, however an STlist object will be created to normalize
the ST data, which is necessary for variogram analysis. The same STlist
will be used later to conduct differential expression analysis with
`STdiff`.

Load the `spatialGE` package:

<div id="cb1" class="sourceCode">

``` r
library('spatialGE')
```

</div>

The `STlist` function takes data in several formats. The reader is
encouraged to see the `STlist` reference (see
[here](https://fridleylab.github.io/spatialGE/reference/STlist.html) to
learn about the different options to read ST data in `spatialGE`. In
this guide, we provide the `STlist` function with comma-delimited files
containing gene expression counts per spot and comma-delimited
containing the spatial coordinates per spot. The example files in this
tutorial can be downloaded from the [spatialGE_Data GitHub
repository](https://github.com/FridleyLab/spatialGE_Data). Users are
encouraged to download these files to familirize themselves with the
data format.

In this tutorial, data will be downloaded and deposited in a temporary
directory. However, the download path can be changed within the
following code block:

<div id="cb2" class="sourceCode">

``` r
thrane_tmp = tempdir()
unlink(thrane_tmp, recursive=TRUE)
dir.create(thrane_tmp)
download.file('https://github.com/FridleyLab/spatialGE_Data/raw/refs/heads/main/melanoma_thrane.zip?download=', 
              destfile=paste0(thrane_tmp, '/', 'melanoma_thrane.zip'), mode='wb')
zip_tmp = list.files(thrane_tmp, pattern='melanoma_thrane.zip$', full.names=TRUE)
unzip(zipfile=zip_tmp, exdir=thrane_tmp)
```

</div>

From the temporary directory, we can use R to generate the file paths to
be passed to the `STlist` function:

<div id="cb3" class="sourceCode">

``` r
# Find expression and coordinates files within the temporary folder
count_files <- list.files(paste0(thrane_tmp, '/melanoma_thrane'), full.names=TRUE, pattern='counts')
coord_files <- list.files(paste0(thrane_tmp, '/melanoma_thrane'), full.names=TRUE, pattern='mapping')
```

</div>

This melanoma ST data set also contains sample-level meta data. We will
also provide this file to specify sample names:

<div id="cb4" class="sourceCode">

``` r
# Find clinical data within folder
clin_file <- list.files(paste0(thrane_tmp, '/melanoma_thrane'), full.names=TRUE, pattern='clinical')
```

</div>

We can load the data into an STlist object with:

<div id="cb5" class="sourceCode">

``` r
melanoma <- STlist(rnacounts=count_files, spotcoords=coord_files, samples=clin_file, cores=2)
```

</div>

*Note*: If you receive a warning indicating that an input file has a
incomplete final line, you can ignore it. Alternatively, modify the
input files with a text editor by adding an empty line at the end of the
files.

The `melanoma` object is an STlist that contains the count data, spot
coordinates, and clinical meta data.

<div id="cb6" class="sourceCode">

``` r
melanoma
```

</div>

To normalize the ST data, the `transform_data` is used:

<div id="cb7" class="sourceCode">

``` r
melanoma <- transform_data(melanoma, cores=2)
```

</div>

</div>

<div class="section level3">

### A variogram of gene expression in ST data

The expression of the gene *COL1A1* will be used to illustrate spatial
dependency in ST. The gene *COL1A1* is one of the collagen genes, a key
component of the extracellular matrix and the stroma compartment. The
stroma is the region in a cancer tissue that surrounds and often
supports the tumor cells. The variogram can show how its expression
varies with respect to the distance between spots within the sample
“ST_mel1_rep2”.

Load `tidtverse` for data manipulation:

<div id="cb8" class="sourceCode">

``` r
library('tidyverse')
```

</div>

Then, data frame is created with both gene *COL1A1* gene expression and
spatial coordinates from sample “ST_mel1_rep2”.

<div id="cb9" class="sourceCode">

``` r
# Sample and gene to be used in example
samplename <- 'ST_mel1_rep2'
gene <- 'COL1A1'

# Prepare data with coordinate and expression data
df_vgm <- melanoma@spatial_meta[[samplename]] %>%
  select(libname, xpos, ypos) %>%
  left_join(., tibble(libname=colnames(melanoma@tr_counts[[samplename]]),
                      geneexpr=as.vector(melanoma@tr_counts[[samplename]][gene, ])), by='libname') %>%
  column_to_rownames(var='libname')
```

</div>

The data frame contains the spatial coordinates of each spot (`xpos`,
`ypos`) and transformed expression of *MLANA* (`geneexpr`).

<div id="cb10" class="sourceCode">

``` r
head(df_vgm)
```

</div>

In a variogram, each point describes the variance in gene expression
(semiovariance) with respect to the distance between spots. If spatial
dependency is present trend should be observed wherein semiovariance
increases as the distance between spots increases. In other words,
variance between close spots is lower than variance between distant
spots. To calculate the variogram, the `geoR` package is used:

Now, the variogram can be plotted:

<div id="cb11" class="sourceCode">

``` r
plot(vgm, pch=16, cex=0.5, ylab='Semiovariance', xlab='Distance', 
     main=paste0('Variogram of ', gene, ' expression'))
text(c(2, 5, 14), c(0.65, 2.1, 0.65), 
     labels=c('Nugget','Sill', 'Range'),
     col=c('purple', 'green', 'goldenrod1'))
clip(x1=-1, x2=12, y1=-1, y2=2.1)
abline(h=2, col='green', lwd=3, lty=2)
clip(x1=-1, x2=1, y1=-1, y2=2)
abline(h=0.75, col='purple', lwd=3, lty=2)
clip(x1=-1, x2=12.1, y1=-1, y2=2)
abline(v=12, col='goldenrod1', lwd=3, lty=2)
```

</div>

We can see that variance is higher at longer distances. Note, that this
relationship is disrupted at longer spot-to-spot distances (\> 15 in
this case). This disruption occurs because as spot-to-spot distances
increase, some spots may belong to distant tissue niches that hold
similarity. Regardless, the positive relationship between *COL1A1*
expression variance and distance is clear a short to medium distances,
first increasing and then forming a plateau. Since a relationship exists
between *COL1A1* expression variance and distance, spatial covariance
models defined by the *nugget*, *sill*, and *range* parameters can be
fitted to account for spatial dependency.

**How is the information in variogram used by `STdiff` ?**

To account for spatial dependency, the `STdiff` calculates three
parameters from the variogram that are necessary to describe the
relationship between gene expression variance and distance between spots
or cells. The three parameters are known as *nugget*, *sill*, and
*range*).

The spatial covariance can be modeled using different covariance
structures. The covariance structure that best describes the
relationship varies from gene to gene, and from sample to sample. Three
popular spatial covariance structures are the exponential, spherical,
and gaussian covariance structures, all of them defined in terms of the
*nugget*, *sill*, and *range* parameters.

Using the variogram calculated previously, the different covariance
structures can be fitted and visualized with geoR like so:

<div id="cb12" class="sourceCode">

``` r
# Exponential covariance structure:
exp_model <- geoR::variofit(vgm, fix.nugget=FALSE, cov.model='exponential',
                            ini.cov.pars=c(0.2, 11), nugget=0.7, # Sill, range, and nugget specified here
                            max.dist=15) # Maximum distance to which model will be fitted

sph_model <- geoR::variofit(vgm, fix.nugget=FALSE, cov.model='spherical',
                            ini.cov.pars=c(0.2, 11), nugget=0.7, 
                            max.dist=15)

gau_model <- geoR::variofit(vgm, fix.nugget=FALSE, cov.model='gaussian',
                            ini.cov.pars=c(0.2, 11), nugget=0.7, 
                            max.dist=15)

plot(vgm, pch=16, cex=0.5, ylab='Semiovariance', xlab='Distance',
     main=paste0('Variogram of ', gene, ' expression with\nfitted covariance structures'))
text(c(20.5, 20.5, 20.5), c(0.8, 0.6, 0.4), labels=c('Exponential','Spherical', 'Gaussian'))
clip(x1=15, x2=17, y1=-1, y2=2.1)
abline(h=0.8, col=alpha('red', 0.7), lwd=3)
abline(h=0.6, col=alpha('blue', 0.7), lwd=3)
abline(h=0.4, col=alpha('orange', 0.7), lwd=3)
clip(x1=-1, x2=12, y1=-1, y2=2.1)
abline(h=2, col='green', lwd=3, lty=2)
clip(x1=-1, x2=1, y1=-1, y2=2)
abline(h=0.75, col='purple', lwd=3, lty=2)
clip(x1=-1, x2=12.1, y1=-1, y2=2)
abline(v=12, col='goldenrod1', lwd=3, lty=2)
lines(exp_model, col=alpha('red', 0.7), lwd=3)
lines(sph_model, col=alpha('blue', 0.7), lwd=3)
lines(gau_model, col=alpha('orange', 0.7), lwd=3)
```

</div>

In the case of *COL1A1* for sample “ST_mel1_rep2”, all models
(exponential, spherical, and gaussian) fit well the variogram. Due to
computational constraints, the `geoR` package is not used in `spatialGE`
to estimate the covariance structures. Rather, the `spaMM` package has
been used and only the exponential covariance structure has been
implemented. While this choice is not optimal for all genes, accounting
for the spatial dependency even if the model fit is not optimal, is
likely better than not accounting for the spatial dependency at all.

</div>

</div>

<div class="section level2">

## Differential gene expression analysis with `STdiff`

In addition to Wilcoxon’s rank test and T-test, the `STdiff` function
can also use *non-spatial* mixed models to test for differentially
expressed genes. In the *non-spatial* mixed models the the expression
*y*(*s*_(*i*)) of a gene in spot/cell *i* is described as:

*y*(*s*_(*i*)) = *μ* + *ε*(*s*_(*i*))

where *μ* is the average expression of the gene in the sample, and
*ε*(*s*_(*i*)) is the random error at spot/cell *i*.

To reduce the number of false positives in differential expression
analysis of ST data, the `STdiff` function features a novel
implementation of *spatial* mixed models with that expands the
non-spatial case to include spatial covariance structures. In the
*spatial* mixed models, the expression *y*(*s*_(*i*)) of a gene in
spot/cell *i* is described as:

*Y*(*s*_(*i*)) = *μ* + *w*(*s*_(*i*)) + *ε*(*s*_(*i*))

where *w*(*s*_(*i*)) denotes the exponential spatial covariance of
spot/cell *i*.

In order to detect differentially expressed genes, groups of spots/cells
should be defined first. In the context of ST data, these groups of
spots/cells often represent tissue domains. The `spatialGE` package
includes a spatially-informed tissue domain detection method called
`STclust`.

<div class="section level3">

### Detection of tissue domains with `STclust`

The `STclust` function groups spots/cells into tissue domains using
hierarchical clustering on a wighted similarity matrix. The similarity
maxtrox is derived from Euclidean transcriptomics distances “shrunk” by
the spatial Euclidean distances. Please, refer to the journal article
describing the method for more details (Ospina et al. 2022). To detect
tissue domains, a spatial weight of 0.025 (`w=0.025`) will be used. The
number of domains will be automatically defined by applying
dynamicTreeClusters (`ks='dtc'`).

<div id="cb13" class="sourceCode">

``` r
melanoma <- STclust(melanoma, 
                    ks='dtc', 
                    ws=0.025, cores=2)
```

</div>

Results of `STclust` domain detection can be plotted using the `STplot`
function:

<div id="cb14" class="sourceCode">

``` r
cluster_p <- STplot(melanoma, 
                    samples='ST_mel1_rep2', 
                    ws=0.025, 
                    deepSplit=FALSE,
                    ptsize=2, color_pal=c('#00BA38', '#EEBA38', '#619CFF', '#F8766D'))

print(cluster_p[[1]])
```

</div>

With the domains identified, the `STdiff` function can be used. The
following command tests for differentially expressed genes on the 1000
genes with the highest variation (as defined by `Seurat`’s function
`FindVariableFeatures`).

<div id="cb15" class="sourceCode">

``` r
deg <- STdiff(melanoma, 
              samples='ST_mel1_rep2', 
              w=0.025, k='dtc', deepSplit=FALSE, 
              topgenes=1000,
              sp_topgenes=0.2, cores=2) # Test the 20% of the top differentially expressed genes (based on adjusted p-value)
```

</div>

The output of `STdiff` is a list, where each element is a data frame
containing the test results for each sample:

<div id="cb16" class="sourceCode">

``` r
print(deg[['ST_mel1_rep2']])
```

</div>

The columns `p_val` and `adj_p_val` are respectively the nominal and
adjusted p-values resulting from the differential expression tests using
the *non-spatial* models. The `exp_p_val` and `exp_adj_p_val` are the
p-values resulting from the *spatial* models.

</div>

<div class="section level3">

### Comparing results from the *non-spatial* and *spatial* models

We can look at the -log10(p-values) to compare each spatial model to the
non-spatial model:

<div id="cb17" class="sourceCode">

``` r
# First load ggrepel to add gene names to plot
library('ggrepel')

# Calculate -log10 p-values
log_pval <- deg[['ST_mel1_rep2']] %>%
  select(gene, cluster_1, mm_p_val, exp_p_val) %>%
  mutate(log_p_val= -log10(mm_p_val+1e-100)) %>% # Add a constant to avoid -log10(0)
  mutate(log_exp_p_val= -log10(exp_p_val+1e-100))

# Create plot
p1 <- ggplot(log_pval, aes(x=log_p_val, y=log_exp_p_val)) +
  geom_abline(intercept=0, slope=1, linetype="dashed") + # Diagonal line... All p-values over this line if equal
  geom_hline(yintercept=-log10(0.05), linetype="dashed", color='gray50') + # Line p-value <0.05
  geom_vline(xintercept=-log10(0.05), linetype="dashed", color='gray50') + # Line p-value <0.05
  geom_point(aes(color=cluster_1)) +
  xlim(0, 20) + ylim(0, 20) + # Restrict axes to ease visualization (very small p-values)
  geom_text_repel(aes(label=gene), size=2, show.legend=FALSE) +
  theme_bw()
```

</div>

<div id="cb18" class="sourceCode">

``` r
p1
```

</div>

When comparing the -log10(p-values) from the *non-spatial* and *spatial*
models, it is possible to see that the p-values from the *non-spatial*
model tended to provide smaller, more significant p-values (i.e., larger
-log10(p-values), below the 1:1 dotted red line). Some genes such as
*DCN*, *MYL9*, *IGF2* are shown as differentially expressed by the
*non-spatial* models, however, are not differentially expressed in the
*spatial* models (p-values under the -log10(0.05) indicated with
horizontal and vertical dashed lines). This pattern is suggestive of
type I error inflation.

Testing spatial models with `STdiff` is both computationally- and
time-intensive. The analysis in this tutorial took approximately 18
minutes in a OS machine with a 6-cores Intel Core i7 and 16GB memory.
Should the user decide to disable spatial testing, the user only needs
to set `sp_topgenes=0`. When running *spatial* tests with more genes,
and samples assayed with more densely sampled technologies (e.g.,
Visium, CosMx-SMI), the user should consider running `STdiff` in a
High-Performance Computing environment (HPC, or “cluster”), setting the
number of cores to use via the `cores` parameter.

**Does `spatialGE` support other differential expression test types?**

It has been shown above that accounting for spatial dependence between
spots/cells is important to control inflation of type-I error (i.e., too
many differentially expressed genes). Nonetheless, the `STdiff` function
also implements differential expression analysis using tests commonly
used in non-spatial single cell analysis. Specifically, the argument
`test_type` can be set to “wilcoxon” or “t_test” to perform either
Wilcoxon’s Rank tests or T-tests respectively:

<div id="cb19" class="sourceCode">

``` r
deg_wilcox <- STdiff(melanoma, 
                     samples='ST_mel1_rep2', 
                     w=0.025, k='dtc', deepSplit=FALSE, 
                     topgenes=1000,
                     test_type='wilcoxon', cores=2)
```

</div>

No spatial tests are executed when Wilcoxon’s Rank tests or T-tests are
requested.

<div id="cb20" class="sourceCode">

``` r
print(deg_wilcox[['ST_mel1_rep2']])
```

</div>

</div>

<div class="section level3">

### Visualizng `STdiff` results

The `spatialGE` package has a built-in function (`STdiff_volcano`) to
generate volcano plots. The function takes `STdiff` outputs and
generates a volcano plot for each sample and cluster (or cluster pair if
pairwise testing was requested).

<div id="cb21" class="sourceCode">

``` r
vp <- STdiff_volcano(deg)
```

</div>

Now, the `ggpubr` package can be used to arrange all plots:

<div id="cb22" class="sourceCode">

``` r
ggpubr::ggarrange(plotlist=vp, ncol=3, common.legend=TRUE)
```

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="section level2">

## References

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent">

<div id="ref-ospina_2024" class="csl-entry">

Ospina, Oscar E, Alex C Soupir, Roberto Manjarres-Betancur, Guillermo
Gonzalez-Calderon, Xiaoqing Yu, and Brooke L Fridley. 2024.
“Differential gene expression analysis of spatial transcriptomic
experiments using spatial mixed models.” *Scientific Reports* 14: 10967.
<https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-61758-0>.

</div>

<div id="ref-ospina_2022" class="csl-entry">

Ospina, Oscar E, Christopher M Wilson, Alex C Soupir, Anders Berglund,
Inna Smalley, Kenneth Y Tsai, and Brooke L Fridley. 2022. “spatialGE:
quantification and visualization of the tumor microenvironment
heterogeneity using spatial transcriptomics.” *Bioinformatics* 38:
2645–47. <https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btac145>.

</div>

<div id="ref-thrane2018spatially" class="csl-entry">

Thrane, Kim, Hanna Eriksson, Jonas Maaskola, Johan Hansson, and Joakim
Lundeberg. 2018. “Spatially Resolved Transcriptomics Enables Dissection
of Genetic Heterogeneity in Stage III Cutaneous Malignant Melanoma.”
*Cancer Research* 78: 5970–79.

</div>

</div>

**Session Info**

<div id="cb23" class="sourceCode">

``` r
sessionInfo()
```

</div>

</div>

</div>
